Hello and welcome to Python Bytes where we deliver Python news and
headlines directly to your earbuds.
This is episode 400.
Woo.
How about that?
Yeah.
I'm Michael Kennedy.
I'm Brian Okken.
And this episode is brought to you by Scout APM.
Check them out.
Links in the podcast player show notes are on the website and we'll
tell you more about them later.
Connect with us over on Mastodon.
Links in the show notes.
And hopefully you're watching us live now on Mondays.
Usually you can find out by going to pythonbytes.fm/live and usually we
have the next one scheduled and you can get notified about that.
And for those of you who would like, even if you missed the show, a quick digest,
an artisanal handcrafted digest of all the things we talked about for the week.
Just become a friend of the show.
Sign up for the newsletter.
Pythonbytes.fm.
Click on newsletter.
Well, before we get into the topics officially, Brian, I think we got to
say a little bit, something about 400.
Yeah.
It's quite a big number.
So big that you are an amazing hat with the butterfly.
Yeah.
That's a cool hat.
Well, I honestly, I want to start by saying one, thanks to you.
Two, thanks to the thousands and thousands of people who listen every week.
Make this possible, honestly.
And I really, really appreciate it.
Yeah.
I want, thanks to you too.
I'm whatever year it was when we started, you reached out to me and said, Hey, what
would you feel like doing a podcast together?
And I really wouldn't have thought we would have been at 400 episodes.
It's pretty cool.
I know it's, it's incredible.
And I thought, well, we don't have really any guests or a lot of like, you know,
forum stuff, so let's celebrate this.
I asked ChatGPT to say, I said, look, there's this big milestone.
Could you just give us a quick celebration sort of thing?
And I think there's a few things that are notable before I read this off.
It's pretty short.
So, but I think it's notable that it knows about you, knows about me, knows
about the show, knows about what the show is about and the topics we've covered.
So anyway, here we go.
This is ChatGPT celebrates episode 400 of Python bites.
Welcome to the big four zero zero Pythonistas.
It's hard to believe we're celebrating the 400th episode of Python bites from the
early days of bite-sized Python news to becoming the source of all things Python.
It's been a wild ride.
We've laughed over the quirks, gasp at new libraries and said
farewell to the GIL together.
Whether you're a seasoned developer, a curious learner, or just here for the
witty banter, you've been an essential part of this journey to Michael and Brian.
You've built a community that turns import this and more than just Zen.
It's a family of passionate Pythonistas.
Your dedication, insight, and humor makes this show more than just tech news.
It's a weekly celebration of what we love about Python and why
we keep coming back for more.
Here's to the next 400 episodes.
May your code be bug-free, your test pass on the first run, and your Python
version always be up to date, rocket snake emoji.
Oh, that's pretty good.
Isn't it?
Actually?
Yeah.
I'm touched.
Chat GPT, I didn't know you loved me that much.
I know.
Thank you.
Chat GPT.
And Michael, that's, that's just touching.
It is.
It's pretty cool actually.
Um, I like that.
Turn your, turn, turns import this into more than just Zen.
Indeed.
I see some thank you out in the audience and thank you all you guys out there.
With that, shall we talk about whatever you want to talk about first?
Sure.
As we've done 399 other times, apparently.
Yeah.
Um, let's talk about Python.
Um, specifically Python 313.
It's just right around the corner.
Um, the official release is scheduled for, the 313.0 is
supposed to come out in October on October 1st.
That's just right around the corner.
That's hard to believe.
So 313.0 candidate release or RC2 is out.
Um, so that was released September 6th, a few days ago.
And, I'm linking to a, oh, I didn't link to the right thing, but,
um, there is, oh, well, I'll just talk about it here.
Anyway.
Uh, it comes out October 1st, Lucas Lange, which we will link to his post,
um, has a post to talk about it as well.
Also talks about, three, a few other releases.
There's, there's, security releases for 312, 311, 310, 3, 9, and 3, 8.
Uh, it's a lot of releases.
And, and the interesting thing about the older releases, I'll cover those first.
Um, is that three, let's see, 312 has a, has a Mac release.
It has binary releases and the Mac release is only for 10.13 or newer.
If you've kept up to date, like fairly recently, it should be fine.
Cause I looked at mine and it was way past that.
Um, but there, there is a limited, there are limits to the Mac iOS, binary
version and all of the, all the others like 311 through 3, 8, they don't,
they're not, they don't have binary distributions built, which is interesting.
Um, but anyway, so, so those, what we're really excited about is 313.
Of course, it's coming out right around the corner.
There's a call to action here.
Um, that is a strong encouragement for third party Python projects and
maintainers of third party projects to prepare your projects because people
will be upgrading in October cause all the last upgrades have been so easy.
Uh, people are going to upgrade.
So make sure your, your projects are ready.
Um, go ahead and start testing on them.
And, and if there's any issues, submit to the bug tracker.
Um, and then also please keep in mind that this is a, the
RC2 is a preview release.
So it's close to the final release, but it's not recommended
for production environments.
So yes, test with it.
Don't run in production yet.
So that's cool.
The one thing that I thought was interesting.
So I, I, I've kind of migrated.
We talked about this recently is, is upgrading your
local Python with UV Python.
You can't use that for 313.
So you still have to use, python.org or some other
mechanism to install 313.
You can't do that through UV Python yet.
So yeah, actually one of my items touches on that.
So we'll talk about that shortly.
Okay.
So yeah, I'm excited.
Yay.
Henry's running around the audience says we're also going to have to change
building wheels with 312 to be, 10 plus 13, 10 dot 13 plus and see
how build wheels interesting that, you know, you think about the cascading
effects of all these requirements, you know, and 10, 13 being the macOS version.
Yeah.
Is that, was that when they split and did like the Intel versus
whatever the other thing is, or
it may have been, but the current version does support the Intel ones.
I'm pretty sure it's just, well,
as of today, they're supposed to announce a lot of that apples,
uh, Apple intelligence, their AI.
Uh, boy.
So that I believe is going to be one of the hard splits as well.
It's like that stuff.
I don't think it's going to work on Intel, but we'll see what they say.
Okay.
I think that's literally going on right now as we speak, the Apple keynote thing,
which is a weird one hour ad that people look forward to, okay.
Such as a world we live in.
All right, let's carry on with a, a pretty sweet transition from UV to talking more
UV here.
So I wrote up, you know, we've been talking about UV recently and I, a couple
of different, this is kind of a little mini extra, extra, extra all around one
topic.
So I wrote up an article about how I'm using the UV Python thing that you just
mentioned, Brian, using that to basically dramatically improve how we build Docker
images.
One of which runs or several of which I guess run Python bytes, Python bytes out
of M gives you the RSS feed, the files, all that kind of stuff.
Right?
Yeah.
So people can check that out, but the short and long of it is if you get down to
the bottom one, it comes with an example, a little flask app, multi multi TOL,
multi image, not multi tier flask app that shows how to go from basic Ubuntu
image to having whatever version of Python you want with the virtual environment
set up on it, including setting up your dependencies and a web server and all of
that in seven seconds from nothing like a dash dash, no cache style, a build.
And that gives you a base image.
You can just kind of keep chilling.
And then if you depend, you take an app and you build it on top of that, like a
flask app or some other kind of Python app, I got it building around seven to
eight, 700 to 800 milliseconds.
So less than a second, which is awesome.
Hey, so, you know, we talked about this back on three 96 and three 98, and we've
been kind of hitting a lot, but I just recently had Shirley Marsh from Astral on.
And we talked about this and I asked him things like, so I see you don't have the,
it didn't have the latest three 12 for a couple of days.
And, I noticed that you don't have a three 13 and basically his thinking.
I, if I remember it correctly is more or less, we plan on supporting a
version before it becomes final, before it becomes stable and gets released.
So by the time three 13 gold, gold master, right, whatever it comes after
the official three 13 zero release, I guess, comes out, it should be available
in UV, but I'm not sure how much before then.
Yeah.
Well, and we also heard from, so Henry Schreiner says three 13 just got
merged in, in the same place, which is, which is that Python build standalone.
Also the three 13 T is now in a PR.
So it, Oh, interesting.
We should free threaded version.
Yeah.
So hopefully, yeah, I think, and that was my final thing to point out is if
people are like, well, okay, when I say UV Python or what I actually, I don't
say UV Python necessarily, what I do is I create a virtual environment with UV and
I just, I want it, I tell it, I want it this version of Python.
Oh, okay.
Right.
And it goes, Oh, you want that version of Python?
Either we've already cached it, or if we don't, we'll just download it from
Python build standalone and then put it there for you.
So if your common working artifact is a virtual environment, then you
don't have to necessarily have, it doesn't even matter if you have system
Python, like literally you could not have Python on your machine and this
would still get you a virtual environment with the right version of Python that you
ask.
But the source of all of this also, I learned about this from talking to Charlie
last week is, Python build standalone.
If you look at the releases, like, let's see, for example, on the latest release,
there are 773 different builds or something.
Wow.
Look at that.
So you can see here, there's CPython 3, 10, 14 with something on x86, 64, four PCs
on windows with this thing, you know, there's just so many variations.
So basically when you say UV, create me a virtual environment with this Python,
it's going to go through those 773, find the one that's the right fit and just
download it and put it there if it's not already cached.
So anyway, that's the whole story.
Okay.
So that thing has that, that one thing has, has a 313.
It just hasn't been released yet then.
So, or I guess we're waiting on that release.
Yeah.
So, so thank you, Henry.
That, that, gives us some more information.
I imagine that it's really down to just what Python build standalone is doing.
And then UV just give me the list of options and let me find things that, you
know, match this operating system.
Something like that.
It sounds like both of us went down the same rabbit hole, but it is kind of
neat to find out where the source of this is so that I know that it wasn't that
hidden, but it did take a little bit of looking to figure out.
Yeah.
Well, they could have been building it themselves.
You don't know right now.
Like you don't know what setting there's all sorts of stuff that's interesting.
And there's also, I recall correctly, Charlie said there are different build
optimization settings for Python build standalone than say what you get off of
python.org or at a homebrew.
It's, it's interesting.
For example, like profile guided optimizations and things like that.
And I don't remember which had, which, which is better, but I feel like the
build standalone came out pretty strong there.
Yeah.
Before we move on, Brian, let me tell you real quick about Scout APM.
They're big supporters of Python bites.
So we appreciate that very much.
So if you are tired of spending hours trying to find the root cause of issues
impacting your performance, then you owe it to yourself to check out Scout APM.
They're a leading Python application performance monitoring tool, APM, that
helps you identify and solve performance abnormalities faster and easier.
Scout APM ties bottlenecks such as memory leaks, slow database queries,
background jobs, and the dreaded N plus one queries that you can end up if you do
lazy loading in your ORM, then you say, Oh no, why is it so slow?
Why are you doing 200 database queries for what should be one?
So you can find out things like that.
And it links it back directly to the source code.
So you can spend less time in the debugger and healing logs and just
finding the problems and moving on.
And you'll love it because it's built for developers by developers.
It makes it easy to get set up.
Seriously.
You can do it in less than four minutes.
So that's awesome.
And the best part is the pricing is straightforward.
You only pay for the data that used with no hidden overage fees or per seat pricing.
And I just learned this, Brian.
They also have, they provide the pro version for free to all open source projects.
So if you're an open source maintainer and you want to have Scout APM for that
project, just shoot them a message or something on their pricing page about that.
So you can start your free trial and get instant insights today.
Visit by them, by set of him slash Scout.
The link is in your podcast player show notes as well.
And please use that link.
Don't just search for them because otherwise they don't think you came from us.
And then they'd stop supporting the show.
So please use our link by them, by set of him slash Scout, check them out.
It really supports the show.
All right, over to you.
Cool.
Um, I wanted to talk about read the docs for a little bit.
So, it just seems like, you know, read the docs been around forever, right?
Apparently have.
Yeah.
So, so there's an article by Eric Holscher, 10 years of sustainable open
source, and it's a, it's a little bit of some, some cool history here.
Um, so one, I, we totally rely on, read the docs, and, and the, all the
tools around it.
So read the docs apparently started in a, with a 40 hour, 48 hour open source sprint
in 2010, 48 hours.
Well, so two days, I guess, and it grew to become a successful part of the
Python, Python ecosystem and other, open source projects.
And, yeah, obviously it's just been around 2010.
Um, but I guess that's, that's about the time that I really started jumping in and
being part of the Python community and not just part of just a user of Python,
but, but part of the community.
So, so that's why it looks like it seems like it's been there forever for me.
Uh, and in 2014, they created read.
So read the docs.org is the open source thing.
Read the docs.com was the, is in 2014.
And there's links to the announcements from 2010 for announcing read the docs
and the announcement for, read, read the docs for business, the.com.
So this is kind of an interesting story about how to make a, a, a service
that, that helps, open source communities all over the place.
Um, and how to make that sustainable.
So there's still sustainable, which is cool.
So what is the sustainability model?
How do they do that?
Because there's, there's four full-time people working on this, which is not that
big, I mean, four people, there's probably a lot of, volunteer,
volunteers on the open source side also.
Um, but for full-time people, that's pretty cool.
Anyway, there's, the.org side has, single non-tracking ads.
And I think they were one of the first that I was aware of that did, did
like a single, just like ethic ad ethical ads or something that just had ads, but
it wasn't tracking you at all, which is how ads should be, I think.
Um, and I I'm totally okay with that to help them sustain their model.
And then the.com is a paid service.
It helps companies for private repos and additional, they have other benefits
also, but sort of read the docs for companies.
Um, and then it also talks about things that didn't work, which I love this.
I love the discussing the parts that didn't work.
I'd like, have you tried this?
Um, one of the things was, just trying on trying, donations
and other optional support.
And it just didn't work at all.
And it left people with, mental health issues and burnout.
This is that's terrible.
Um, the other thing was, consulting services where you think
about that, like maybe offer services for people that to pay, but, the
bad downside of that was it took away from a time that they wanted
to work on the main project.
Um, they experimented with grant funding and that was cool.
Cause they got some, like a blob of money at a time, but it's a one-time
thing and it's not that easy to keep going and getting more grants.
So the current model is the paid service plus the advertising.
And, that's cool.
Um, talk about some lessons learned, which is neat.
Um, basically, you don't get extra points for being bootstrapped.
Uh, people will compare you to VC funded companies anyway, which is it's, it's
cool that they call it out because that's obvious, but also sometimes not obvious.
Um, even if you're community driven bootstrapped, you don't get any points
for that, but we, we still expect you to be perfect.
Um, the other thing was, that keeping trust in the community
was the most important thing.
Um, and, yeah, it, they said it it's cliche, but trust is hard
to earn and easy to lose.
Uh, definitely.
Um, and they can't, can't maximize profits.
Um, unless you keep trust in the, with the community, which,
definitely, support that.
Uh, the, the one part that I thought was one of the reasons why I highlighted
this is because this is a lesson I think that can go, not just for people trying
to sustain a funding model, but just eat lots of open source projects can, can
listen to this and the lesson is contribution is easier in less complex
parts of the code base.
So they've noticed that they've got, they've got their core stuff,
the read the docs.org repo.
Uh, the core stuff that is.
Got some complex stuff in it and it's hard to get people to help out, but
there's other things like contributions to the Sphinx theme or extensions or
small Python or JavaScript projects that are work alongside of it that are easier
to get people to contribute to.
Cause they're, they're smaller, less, I guess, less complicated bits of code.
Um, I think a lot of open source projects probably could do something
like that of separating out where the code is and say, if you'd like to
contribute, maybe don't touch this part.
Cause it's kind of hairy and you might, it takes a while to get into.
You can, but it's going to be difficult.
Um, and, I've noticed that with lots of projects.
So anyway, congratulations to all of them for 10 years.
That's awesome.
And, and then I was reading something and I found, I learned something is that
there's, there's, I kind of associate read the docs with Sphinx only, but that's not
true.
Um, there is now, there was a, effort to separate some of the customization
and they have a different build process going on now.
And you can, the Sphinx or the read the docs build system now supports any
documentation tool or it should, which I didn't know about.
So that's.
Yeah.
That's cool.
Almost like a general static site platform probably.
Yeah.
Anyway, congratulations.
It's a pretty important section of the Python community and also got some cool
Python, support Lint ties as well, which is cool.
Yeah.
Really helps humanize the Python space.
Wouldn't you say Brian?
Yeah.
Which is what I want to talk about next.
This project by Hugo.
I know you've pointed this out before Brian, I believe I can actually get to him.
There we go.
Hugo van Kinnamande, CPython core developer and many, many project maintainer.
One of the projects is humanize.
And I recently, when I've written this code for, you know, small scale before,
because I kind of needed it.
And if I knew about this, it just wouldn't.
But also I recently just started using it and it's super simple, super easy to adopt.
You see examples of it right here on the GitHub screen.
If you visit their GitHub repo and see where it says seven months ago, last
week, last year, that kind of stuff.
Instead of just putting a date.
Yeah.
It's that kind of stuff that humanize does, but for different things.
So if I go over to, I love all these ties from falling off from you from read the
docs, if I go over to read the docs for them and I wait, apparently, and it comes
up, okay, so then they basically have four areas that are relevant.
It works in different languages, many, many different languages, which is cool.
It mostly works in numbers, but as I pointed out, it also works on time.
So we look at time.
It has a natural date.
Um, some of these don't have great examples.
For example, the time and file size could have really nice, dates.
So the one I mentioned with the GitHub is natural Delta.
It would say things like a year ago or two years ago, or in 13 seconds, stuff like that.
It has a similar natural time and precise Deltas if you want those kinds of things.
Also as for file size.
So it'll say things like 300 bytes, 3.0 megabytes, 2.9 kilobytes or whatever.
Right.
So you can just give it a number and tell it, you know, here's how many bytes it is.
Make this friendly and it'll kind of figure out the right scale is a megabyte
kilobyte that you don't want 0.00, zero megabytes.
You just want, you know, switch that to kilobytes or bytes.
Right.
So file size is cool, but the one that has tons of stuff going on is number.
So you can have an associated press style number.
I guess it's must be the way they're a convention when you're writing
articles on how to speak about numbers.
So if it's a small number, use, written out words like F I V E for five.
But if it's, you know, one zero zero one, two, one seven, you don't, you
don't write that out as a huge long thing.
You just put the straight number.
Right.
So I think the cutoff is 10, which is pretty cool.
Uh, it has clamp.
And so you can talk about percentiles.
For example, if you say a really, really small number and you say the floor is 0.01
percent, it'll, or just that number as a ratio, it'll say the number that you have
for this, the value is less than 0.01.
Oh, nice.
Or you can do it as a percent here and you can say this one, this particular
value is greater than 99% or it's in the top 10% or you can just say like under
1 million, which is pretty awesome.
Right?
Yeah.
So what else have we got here?
Fractional.
So this just takes, you know, floating point numbers and puts them into
fractions, like one and three 10s or one and a third or something like that.
Into comma, this one I would just do with formatting, but you can have
it put commas in for separators.
Into word.
This one is really nice.
So if I have one with seven zeros, it'll say 1.0 million, or if you put in 1.2
billion, but as like integers, it'll just say 1.2 billion or all kinds of things.
You can give it precisions, et cetera.
Nice.
Right?
It's very cool.
I like that.
The scientific stuff.
The scientific is good.
The metric.
This is really nice.
If you give it a base measurement, like Watts or grams or something, and then
you say, give me this number in that unit system, so for example, if you
say 1500 in terms of volts, it'll give you 1.5 kilovolts.
That's pretty fancy.
Yeah.
Or Watts.
And you give it some huge number, say this many megawatts or really, really
small one micro, I don't know what F is in metric because to me that's
Fahrenheit, so whatever.
Um, and the micro stuff is cool.
Cause I always have to hunt it down.
I have no idea how to type a micro symbol.
Yeah.
So, click to the scientific one or the, the 10 to the powers are pretty
cool.
Um, the 10 to the minus one, the, with the little superscript that's.
Yeah.
Instead of having 10 E three, it actually has 10 superscript three.
So a thousand is one times 10 to the three with actual the three, like you
would write it, not the way computers have to write it.
So yeah, it's really nice.
Anyway, it's just, if you need this kind of stuff, really easy to adopt and
understand, if not, then, you know, still interesting.
However, if someone is out there looking to contribute to this project, I would
say more examples, the numbers have awesome examples and all the other ones
are kind of, you may or may not even know what it's going to do.
So, Hey, let's get there.
Some examples as a PR and shipping over to you guys.
That'd be cool.
And, you know, documentation contributions are usually very welcome.
So yes, indeed.
All right.
Extras, Brian.
I just have one extra.
I wanted that to shut out.
So I talked about that.
I thought test podcast is going to go back to testing code, even though.
So it is.
So I finally finished that migration and actually put out an episode.
So, 222 is the 222 is the second episode of a two part series that started in June.
Sorry, serious cliffhanger, serious cliffhanger.
So, yeah.
So that's there.
And then I got a question.
I sent out an email and said, Hey, finally have another episode out.
And somebody said, you should do transcripts.
And I guess I hadn't announced that, but transcripts are there.
I've had transcripts in the last, I don't know, like the last 30 episodes or something.
So transcripts are AI generated.
So they're not perfect.
Like this is great.
I gotta find one of these, a DB dot PI that's fine, but there's like some, some
dot pies that show up as dot P I and some dot E I E is some a dot DB, like actually
spelling out the D O T this is terrible.
Oh, API dot P I E is hilarious.
So, I could go through and try to fix this stuff, but I'm going to probably
try to hire my kid to go do it for me.
But anyway, so they're there.
That's all I wanted to say is it's in it.
I'm not doing this weekly.
Um, I actually talked to, to a friend of mine, Michael Kennedy.
Um, and he said, he said it'd be kind of cool to, to do seasons.
And so I'm kicking around the idea of doing seasons.
Yeah.
Well, themes.
I like it.
I think it'd be great.
Yeah.
Anyway, that's just my extra.
Awesome.
I have a couple of quick, code in the castle event is almost over.
It's almost, booked and happening.
So if you want to be part of it, I'll put a link in there.
Please.
Uh, last kind of last call.
So check that out.
Yeah, I know.
All right.
We got some interesting email.
That's it.
I think I covered the Anaconda code plugin for Excel, how it runs locally.
It runs on.
PyScript, all these good things gives you other features.
Well, look who sent this in.
I want to make sure I give some credits.
This was by Ruud van der Ham.
Thank you for sending this in.
This is a project created and basically, and when you have these Excel, I thought
in bits of code, you have to write all the code in one function and things like that.
And there's other limitations as well.
So basically he made it so you can have a lot more, formatting variability.
I suppose.
And then you just have this bit of code that will just run a whole set of
different bits of code that you can have into your workbook, which is kind of
interesting.
So as a follow-up to that, people are interested.
They can check that out.
And just a quick out shout out to iStats menu.
Do you iStats menu, Brian, for your Mac?
No.
If you want more real time stats for what your Mac is up to as they just released a
new version, looks super cool.
I'm just starting to play with it.
So obvious things like CPU and stuff, but if you hover over them, it'll give you
tons of detail.
Like macOS is kind of hard to get a lot of these pieces of information, but it'll
have uptime.
It'll have, like how much power your CPU is pulling out of, or your computer's
pulling out of the wall, which is kind of interesting as a, you know, how hard is it
working?
Like how many Watts is it pulling?
And so anyway, that's cool.
That's cool.
Yeah.
People can check it out.
It's pretty nice.
Nice.
Yeah.
That is it.
And you want to close it out with a joke, our big episode 400?
Definitely.
All right.
This come, this is sort of in the theme of I'm learning new programming languages,
right?
Mostly as beginners says, comes from DevHumor says, beginner programmers, when
they learn a new programming language, just a shock.
Is this Morty?
I don't know.
I think so.
Anyway.
Well, that just sounds like Python with extra steps.
Yeah.
Yeah, exactly.
Exactly.
That's cool.
But, why all the stuff there?
Anyway, thanks for episode 400.
Thank you everyone for listening.
Thank you, Scott APM for supporting the show.
Check them out as well.
Thank you.
Yep.
See you, Brian.